(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
So, let's implement Selection Sort.
Now as I said, when I implemented bubble sort,
I'm not going to create the projects on screen anymore,
so I've created a new project,
I'm putting the code into package
academy.learnprogramming.selectionsort.
I've added our array, I've added the code
to print the array and I've added the swap method
that I wrote in the bubble sort video,
so if you didn't watch that video
or you need a review of what this method is doing,
you can go back and watch that video,
so let's get cracking on selection sort.
So, we're gonna say for int lastUnsortedIndex
equals and once again, this will be intArray.length
minus one because at the beginning of the implementation,
the entire array is unsorted,
it's in the unsorted partition
and so, the lastUnsortedIndex will be the last valid index
in the array which is six.
Now it's length minus one.
And we wanna keep going
as long as the lastUnsortedIndex is greater than zero.
Once it hits zero, that means the entire array is sorted
and we're going to decrement this on each iteration,
so this is starting out exactly
the same way bubble sort started.
So, we're gonna initialise our largest index to zero,
so right now we're saying that in the unsorted partition,
the largest element is at position zero
'cause we haven't actually looked at anything yet
and then we're gonna say for int i equals one,
i is less than or equal to the lastUnsortedIndex,
i++ and what we wanna do
is we want to traverse the unsorted partition
and look for the largest element,
so we're going to start at one
'cause we've initialised largest to zero,
so we wanna say is the element at position one greater
than the largest element that we know about so far?
Because if it is, then we need to update largest
and we're gonna do that until we hit the end
of the unsorted partition.
Now, unlike with bubble sort,
we do need to check the element in the last position,
in bubble sort, we didn't need the equals
because we were comparing i against i plus one
and so, the last index we wanted to check
was lastUnsortedIndex minus one
against lastUnsortedIndex
but here we wanna compare every element
against whatever's largest,
so we need to compare this last element as well.
So, that's what the equals is doing here
and so, that's what we wanna do.
We wanna say if intArray i
is greater than intArray largest
because that's the largest element we know about so far,
then we wanna update largest to i.
So, we're gonna compare 35 against 20
on this first iteration.
35 is bigger than 20
and so, largest is gonna get updated to one
and then on the next iteration,
we're gonna be comparing against 35
because that's the largest element we found so far.
So, once we drop out of this loop,
what do we wanna do?
Well, we wanna swap the largest element that we found
with the last element in the unsorted partition,
so with the element that's sitting at lastUnsortedIndex.
And so, we can use our handy swap method to do that,
so we'll pass intArray
and we'll pass largest and lastUnsortedIndex.
And that's it.
We have implemented selection sort.
So, once again, if you're having trouble understanding this,
review the last video
where we go through this by hand with the slide.
So, the outer loop is the one that's increasing
the sorted partition by one,
it's growing it from right to left
and the inner loop is the one
that's looking for the largest element
and then once we've looked at all the elements
and we know which one is the largest,
at that point, we're gonna swap the largest element
with the last element in the unsorted partition
and when we look back around,
of course at that point,
we have grown the sorted partition by one
and so, we subtract one from the lastUnsortedIndex.
So, let's run this, let's see if this actually works.
And it does.
Here's our sorted array.
Minus 22, minus 15, one, seven, 20, 35 and 55.
And I'll just close this off.
Now as I said, this is a quadratic algorithm,
O to the n squared
and once again, we have two loops
and I said that that's a hint
because usually each loop can be considered n
and so, we have n times n
and that gives us O to the n squared.
So, that's selection sort.
On each traversal of the array,
it selects the largest value
and it adds it into the sorted partition.
I'll see you in the next video.